\input texinfo   @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename mpdmacs.info
@settitle mpdmacs
@include version.texi
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* mpdmacs: (mpdmacs). A lightweight MPD client.
@end direntry

@copying
This manual corresponds to mpdmacs version @value{VERSION}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2024-2025 Michael Herstine <sp1ff@@pobox.com>

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.

A copy of the license is also available from the Free Software
Foundation Web site at @url{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html}.

@end quotation

This document was typeset with
@uref{http://www.texinfo.org/, GNU Texinfo}.

@end copying

@c title & copyright-- won't appear in online output.
@titlepage
@title mpdmacs
@subtitle A lightweight MPD client
@author @email{sp1ff@@pobox.com}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@c ``top'' node-- this is the start of the online output, but doesn't
@c appear in the printed manual
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top mpdmacs

A lightweight MPD client.

This manual corresponds to mpdmacs version @value{VERSION}.

@end ifnottex

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* Introduction::
* Configuring the mpdmacs Minor Mode::
* What the mpdmacs Minor Mode Can Do::
* Roadmap & Contributing::
* Index::
* Function Index::
* Variable Index::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@cindex MPD
The @url{https://www.musicpd.org, Music Player Daemon} (or
MPD) is a ``flexible, powerful, server-side application for playing
music.'' It offers an
@url{https://mpd.readthedocs.io/en/latest/protocol.html, API} for
interacting with the daemon & building client applications.
@cindex elmpd
@url{https://www.unwoundstack.com/doc/mpdmacs/curr, elmpd} is a
lightweight, asynchronous
@url{https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_mono/elisp.html,
Emacs Lisp} package for talking to an MPD instance over that protocol.

mpdmacs is an
@url{https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_mono/emacs.html,
Emacs}
@url{https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_mono/elisp.html#Minor-Modes,
Minor Mode} built on elmpd that turns Emacs into a lightweight MPD
client; so lightweight, in fact, that it provides almost no user
interface-- merely a collection of commands & hooks that are generally
available when writing code, reading mail & so forth.

Instructions for obtaining & installing the package may be found in the
@url{https://github.com/sp1ff/mpdmacs, README}. Configuration options
are described @ref{Configuring the mpdmacs Minor Mode, below} and
the features offered by the minor mode are described in
@ref{What the mpdmacs Minor Mode Can Do}.

@cindex configuration
@node Configuring the mpdmacs Minor Mode
@chapter Configuring the mpdmacs Minor Mode

Before loading & enabling @code{mpdmacs-mode}, the reader will need to
configure it with the location of the MPD instance to be controlled. If
communications over TCP/IP are desired, set the following two variables:

@defvr {User Option} mpdmacs-host
The hostname on which MPD is listening.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} mpdmacs-port
The port at which MPD is listening.
@end defvr

If, however, the reader would prefer to communicate with MPD over
its Unix socket:

@defvr {User Option} mpdmacs-socket
The path of the Unix socket on which MPD is listening. If the TCP/IP
socket is preferred, it is best to set this to nil: @code{mpdmacs-mode}
will try the local socket first, if it exists.
@end defvr

mpdmacs supplies several interactive commands (see @pxref{What the
mpdmacs Minor Mode Can Do, below}), with keybindings in
@code{mpdmacs-mode-keymap};
@cindex chord
you may want to map a chord you find
convenient to that keymap like so:

@lisp
(defun my-mpdmacs-hook ()
  (global-set-key "\C-c m" 'mpdmacs-mode-keymap))
(add-hook 'mpdmacs-mode-hook 'my-mpdmacs-hook)
@end lisp

Having installed & configured mpdmacs, load it as usual:

@lisp
(require 'mpdmacs)
@end lisp

At this point, mpdmacs has done nothing: it needs to be explicitly
enabled by calling @code{mpdmacs-mode}:

@deffn Command mpdmacs-mode &optional ARG
Turn mpdmacs-mode on & off. Interactively, with no prefix argument,
toggle the mode. A prefix argument enables the mode if the argument is
positive, and disables it otherwise.

When called from Lisp, toggle the mode if the argument is @code{toggle},
disable the mode if the argument is a non-positive integer, and enables
the mode otherwise (including if the argument is omitted or nil or a
positive integer).
@end deffn

Enabling the minor mode will open a connection to your MPD server, begin
monitoring its state for changes, and enable the caller to begin issuing
commands.

@node What the mpdmacs Minor Mode Can Do
@chapter What the mpdmacs Minor Mode Can Do

@cindex mpdel
@cindex mpc
mpdmacs, in contrast to mpdel or mpc, is not a full-fledged application,
but rather a global minor mode. As such, it provides no (or, at least,
not a dedicated) user interface but rather a suite of commands that are
available at all times; while editing code, reading email or RSS, and so
on.

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* Acting as a Player Controller::
* Setting MPD Configuration Options::
* Playlists Control::
* The Current Track::
* Notifications::
@end menu

@cindex controlling the player
@node Acting as a Player Controller
@section Acting as a Player Controller

The most basic function of the mpdmacs minor mode is to provide a set of
command for controlling MPD playback.

@deffn Command mpdmacs-play
Begin playing the current playlist (cf. MPD command @code{play}).
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-stop
Stop playback (cf. MPD command @code{stop}).
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-toggle-pause
Pause or resume playback (toggles; cf. MPD command @code{pause}).
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-replay
Seeks back to time zero in the current track (cf. MPD command @code{seekcur}).
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-next
Plays the next song in the current playlist (cf. MPD command @code{next}).
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-previous
Plays the previous song in the current playlist (cf. MPD command @code{previous}).
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-set-volume ARG
Set the MPD volume to ARG, which must be an integer in the range 0-100
(cf. MPD command @code{setvol}).
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-inc-volume
Increment the MPD volume; takes a numeric prefix argument (defaults to one).
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-dec-volume
Decrement the MPD volume; takes a numeric prefix argument (defaults to one).
@end deffn

@cindex configuring the player
@node Setting MPD Configuration Options
@section Setting MPD Configuration Options

@deffn Command mpdmacs-toggle-random
Toggle the state of the MPD @code{random} option.
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-toggle-consume
Toggle the state of the MPD @code{consume} option.
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-set-crossfade
Set the MPD @code{crossfade} option; takes a numeric prefix argument;
lacking that read the number of seconds.
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-rotate-single
Rotate through the MPD @code{single} settings: off, enabled, or
@code{oneshot}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-rotate-replay-gain
Rotate through the MPD @code{replay_gain_mode} settings:
@enumerate
@item
off
@item
track
@item
album
@item
auto
@end enumerate
@end deffn

@cindex MPD playlists
@node Playlists Control
@section Playlists Control

@deffn Command mpdmacs-clear
Clear the current play queue.
@end deffn

@deffn Command mpdmacs-load-playlist playlist
Load the saved PLAYLIST into the queue. If invoked interactively, the
stored playlist will be read interactively.
@end deffn

@deffn mpdmacs-send-to-playlist playlist
Send the current track to PLAYLIST. If invoked interactively, the target
playlist will be read interactively.
@end deffn

@cindex current track
@node The Current Track
@section The Current Track

@cindex current song
mpdmacs-mode does offer a few, small, user-interface elements beyond
commands & notifications.

@deffn Command mpdmacs-show-current-song
Display information about the current song.
This command will display the information in a dedicated buffer
and display it. 
@code{mpdmacs-show-current-song-hook} is run in the buffer before display.
@end deffn

@defvr {User Option} mpdmacs-current-song-buffer
The name of the buffer to use for current song information.
The default value is ``*Current Song*''.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} defvar mpdmacs-show-current-song-hook
Normal hook run before @code{mpdmacs-show-current-song} returns. The
hook will be invoked in the current song buffer.
@end defvr

@cindex mode line
In addition, when mpdmacs-mode is enabled, the current track will be
displayed in the Emacs mode line. This can be customized or entirely
disabled by customizing:

@defvr {User Option} mpdmacs-mode-line-update-function
Function that will be invoked on current track change; if nil the mode
line will not be updated.
@end defvr

@cindex notifications
@node Notifications
@section Notifications

mpdmacs-mode defines a few hooks that will be run on certain player
changes.

@defvr {User Option} mpdmacs-player-state-changed-hook
Normal hook invoked when any change to the player or mixer state is
detected.
@end defvr

@defvr {User Option} mpdmacs-sticker-change-hook
Normal hook invoked when any change to the sticker database is detected.
@end defvr
  
@node Roadmap & Contributing
@chapter Roadmap & Contributing

mpdmacs was first released in late 2020 and saw intermittent development
over the next few years. In the fall of 2024 I decided to finally call
this ``1.0'', implying a certain level of stability (and notably the
project will respect semver going forward).

Bugs & feature requests are welcome in the
@url{https://github.com/sp1ff/mpdmacs/issues, Issues} section of the
project. Also, you can just reach out directly at
@email{sp1ff@@pobox.com}, or shoot a webmention to me at my
@url{https://www.unwoundstack.com,web site}.

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@node Function Index
@unnumbered Function Index

@printindex fn

@node Variable Index
@unnumbered Variable Index

@printindex vr

@bye
